Early elicitation and classification of tone

Steven Bird, Haejoong Lee, Quynh-Chi Nguyen

Abstract

Studying a tone language involves careful transcription of
tone on words and phrases. This is challenging when the
phonological categories -- the tones or melodies -- have not been
identified. Effects such as coarticulation, sandhi, and phrase-level
prosody appear as obstacles to early elicitation and classification
of tone. This article presents an approach to this problem along
with supporting software, an open source tool called Toney.
After users categorise spoken words and phrases, the software
automatically generalises from these examples and helps with
the classification of new items using partial least-squares regression.
We illustrate the approach with examples from Mandarin Chinese
and from Alekano, a tone language from Papua New Guinea.

1. Introduction

Early elicitation of tone data is often quite disorienting.
We elicit words and phrases and try to transcribe the
tone, but we don't know the salient categories yet.

(1) gènēzá àní'gùvè  (I saw (a) tongue)

The target word gènēzá appears to have a rising sequence, which
we have transcribed as low-mid-high. However, the position of the mid between
L and H is immediately suspicious: perhaps it is really a low tone that has been
raised in the context of H, in which case we may want to view this as
a two tone system, and write instead genezá aní'guve (leaving low tone unmarked),
and positing a phonetic implementation rule L->M/L_H.

After further elicitation we build up a picture of the inventory of tonal melodies on words with a fixed syllable shape, in this case CVCVCV words:

(2)
a.  LLH  genezá aní'guve  (I saw tongue)
b.  LHH  golání aní'guve  (I saw blood)
c.  LHL  gosíha aní'guve  (I saw snake)
d.  HLH  lágahá aní'guve  (I saw fish)

Further possibilities for these words show up when we add a suffix.

(3)
a.  LLL  geneza-má aní'guve  (I saw the tongue)
b.  LHH  golání-má aní'guve  (I saw the blood)
c.  LHL  gosíha-má aní'guve  (I saw the snake)
d.  HLL  lágaha-má aní'guve  (I saw the fish)

Here, the final syllable of (3a) and (3d) becomes L, and we could posit a rule
H->L/L_#H. The phonetic rule which raises this L seems to be variable,
and we get both level and rising variants, e.g. geneza-F2, geneza-F2b.

Questions:

* how reliable are these conclusions?
* want a clean "division of labour" between phonology and phonetics
* trying to unpack both at the same time.


The point is, we need to write something down, but anything we write down
is going to be provisional.

Our transcription
practice evolves as we tune into the relevant contrasts, but we have
to always be ready to revise our practice. For segmental contrasts,
it is usually straightforward to begin with narrow phonetic transcriptions
and slowly leave out details that are found to be non-contrastive.
For instance, after noting that voiceless obstruents are aspirated in
syllable onset position, we may decide to stop marking aspiration. Over time,
transcription proceeds more quickly. Yet all the time, we try to
remain open to detecting new contrasts (REFS, cf Hyman 2001).

The situation seems to be generally more acute for tone. The IPA tone notation is
cumbersome, and involves
five levels with the corresponding contours. In my own experience, it
has been more effective to draw stylized contours, e.g [-_/].
It can be hard to distinguish the tone on a short syllable in context.
We may use elicitation frames, but we have to be alert to the possibility that
these may effect the target word in ways we do not yet understand.
Or we may work with words in isolation, though this may invoke phrase-level
prosody, since the isolated word must be prosodically well-formed as
a phrase and as an utterance.
Other prosodic effects get in the way, such as
downtrends, phrase-boundary effects, tonal coarticulation, intrinsic vowel F0.
Eyeballing F0 traces often doesn't help: too much noise.

In short, we are trying to uncover discrete tonal categories like High and Low,
without knowing much about the function which gave them their observable phonetic realization.
When we detect a small pitch difference between consecutive syllables, we can't
be sure whether this points to an underlying contrast, or whether it is just
a case of tonal coarticulation. After a while, perhaps a week or a month, our
language acquisition device has become engaged, and we begin to ``hear'' the tone.

We set ourselves the goal of speeding up this process, and making it more easy and
reliable.

2. Phonetic realization of tone [SB]

* series of diagrams: what we might hope for, and what we actually get
* cite some literature on learning the parameters, e.g. Shih and Kochanski

3. Liberman approach [QN + SB]

* Functional PCA -- layman's understanding of what it is doing; Aston paper
* introduce the Mandarin example and show some of the steps
* critique: manual process of inspecting contours and removing factors

4. Toney [HL + SB]

* interface, screenshot
* file format
* manual iterative approach to learning the clusters and extending them
* doing this automatically (behaviour with automatic classification)
* how the automatic method works

5. Conclusion

* findings
* future prospects





References

Hyman, Larry M (2001). Fieldwork as a state of mind.  In Paul Newman
  and Martha Ratliff (eds). Linguistic Fieldwork.  Cambridge
  University Press.

